README.md, before:

# Alfresco Backup System

Python-based backup system for Alfresco Content Management System with PostgreSQL and contentstore backups.

## Features

- PostgreSQL WAL configuration validation (validates archiving is enabled)
- PostgreSQL base backup using pg_basebackup
- Contentstore rsync with hardlink optimization for space efficiency
- WAL archive monitoring
- Automated retention policy enforcement
- Email alerts on failures with detailed error information
- File-based locking to prevent concurrent executions
- Comprehensive logging

## Requirements

- Python 3.7+
- PostgreSQL client tools (pg_basebackup)
- rsync
- Sufficient disk space for backups

## Quick Installation (Recommended)

### Automated Setup Script

The easiest way to set up the backup system is using the interactive setup script:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup.git
cd alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Run the setup wizard WITH SUDO (recommended for easy directory creation)
sudo python3 setup.py
```

The setup script will:
- Check if all required tools are installed
- Help you create the `.env` configuration file
- Create all necessary backup directories (in `/mnt/backups` or similar)
- Configure proper permissions for WAL archiving
- **Automatically configure Alfresco's embedded PostgreSQL** for WAL archiving
  - Detects PostgreSQL version (9.4 for Alfresco 5.2)
  - Updates `postgresql.conf` with version-appropriate WAL settings
  - Uses `hot_standby` for PostgreSQL 9.4, `replica` for 9.6+
  - Updates `pg_hba.conf` for replication access
  - Creates backups of original config files
- Create a virtual environment and install dependencies
- Verify the installation

**Important:**
- **Recommended:** Run with `sudo` to avoid permission issues
- When run with sudo, all files will be owned by the actual user (not root)
- The script detects who ran sudo and ensures proper ownership
- The script asks permission before each step and explains what it will do
- PostgreSQL configuration files will be backed up before modification

After setup completes, you'll need to restart Alfresco for PostgreSQL changes to take effect.

---

## Manual Installation on Ubuntu

If you prefer to set up manually or need more control, follow these steps:

### Step 1: Update System Packages
```bash
sudo apt-get update
```

### Step 2: Install Python 3 and pip
```bash
sudo apt-get install -y python3 python3-pip python3-venv
```

### Step 3: Install PostgreSQL Client Tools
```bash
# Install PostgreSQL client tools (includes pg_basebackup)
sudo apt-get install -y postgresql-client

# Verify installation
pg_basebackup --version
```

### Step 4: Install rsync
```bash
sudo apt-get install -y rsync

# Verify installation
rsync --version
```

### Step 5: Clone or Download This Repository
```bash
# Clone as your Alfresco user (not root)
cd /opt
sudo mkdir -p alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
sudo chown $USER:$USER alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup.git
cd alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Ensure the directory is owned by the current user
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
```

### Step 6: Create Virtual Environment (Recommended)
```bash
# Create venv as regular user (NOT with sudo)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

### Step 7: Install Python Dependencies
```bash
# Install packages in the virtual environment (no sudo needed)
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Step 8: Create Backup Directory
```bash
# Create backup directory owned by current user
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups/alfresco
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /mnt/backups/alfresco
sudo chmod 755 /mnt/backups/alfresco
```

### Step 9: Configure Environment Variables

Create your `.env` file from the example:
```bash
# Copy and edit with your actual values
cat > .env << 'EOF'
# Database Configuration
PGHOST=localhost
PGPORT=5432
PGUSER=alfresco
PGPASSWORD=your_db_password_here

# Paths
BACKUP_DIR=/mnt/backups/alfresco
ALF_BASE_DIR=/opt/alfresco

# Retention Policy
RETENTION_DAYS=30

# Email Alerts (only sent on failures)
SMTP_HOST=smtp.gmail.com
SMTP_PORT=587
SMTP_USER=backups@yourcompany.com
SMTP_PASSWORD=your_email_password_here
ALERT_EMAIL=ops-team@yourcompany.com
ALERT_FROM=backups@yourcompany.com
EOF
```

### Step 10: Set File Permissions
```bash
# Make the backup script executable
chmod +x backup.py

# Secure your .env file
chmod 600 .env
```

### Step 11: Verify Installation
```bash
# Test that all tools are available
python3 --version
pg_basebackup --version
rsync --version

# Test the backup script help
python3 backup.py --help 2>/dev/null || echo "Ready to configure and run backups"
```

## Usage

### Running Backups Manually

If using virtual environment:
```bash
cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
source venv/bin/activate
python backup.py
```

Or specify a custom env file location:
```bash
python backup.py /path/to/custom.env
```

### Scheduling with Cron

**Important:** Run cron jobs as the same user that runs Alfresco (not root). This ensures proper file permissions.

For daily backups at 2 AM, add to crontab:

**If using virtual environment:**
```bash
# Edit crontab as the Alfresco user (NOT using sudo crontab)
crontab -e

# Add this line (adjust paths if needed):
0 2 * * * cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup && /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup/venv/bin/python /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup/backup.py >> /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log 2>&1
```

**If installed system-wide:**
```bash
# Edit crontab as the Alfresco user (NOT using sudo crontab)
crontab -e

# Add this line:
0 2 * * * cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup && python3 backup.py >> /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log 2>&1
```

**Create the log file with proper permissions:**
```bash
sudo touch /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
sudo chown $USER:$USER /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
sudo chmod 644 /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
```

## What Gets Backed Up

1. **PostgreSQL Database**: Full base backup using pg_basebackup in compressed tar format
2. **Contentstore**: All files in `ALF_BASE_DIR/contentstore` using rsync with hardlinks
3. **WAL Files**: Monitored in `BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal` for PITR capability

## PostgreSQL WAL Configuration Requirements

**Note:** If you used the automated setup script (`setup.py`), PostgreSQL is already configured. This section is for reference or manual configuration.

Alfresco 5.2 comes with embedded PostgreSQL. Before backups can run, it must be configured for WAL (Write-Ahead Log) archiving to enable Point-in-Time Recovery (PITR).

### Step 1: Locate PostgreSQL Configuration File

For Alfresco's embedded PostgreSQL, config files are typically in:
1. `ALF_BASE_DIR/postgresql/postgresql.conf`
2. `ALF_BASE_DIR/alf_data/postgresql/postgresql.conf`

The automated setup script will find and configure these automatically.

### Step 2: Create WAL Archive Directory

```bash
# Create WAL archive directory (must match BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal in your .env)
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal

# Make it writable by both postgres (for archiving) and your user (for monitoring)
sudo chown postgres:$USER /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal
sudo chmod 770 /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal
```

### Step 3: Edit PostgreSQL Configuration

**Required settings:**

```bash
# Edit postgresql.conf (use the path from Step 1)
sudo nano /etc/postgresql/14/main/postgresql.conf
```

Add or modify these settings:

```conf
# WAL archiving settings for PostgreSQL 9.4 (Alfresco 5.2)
wal_level = hot_standby                # Use 'hot_standby' for 9.4, 'replica' for 9.6+
archive_mode = on                      # Enable archiving
archive_command = 'test ! -f /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f && cp %p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f'
archive_timeout = 300                  # Force WAL switch every 5 minutes (optional)

# Recommended additional settings for backup
max_wal_senders = 3                    # Allow pg_basebackup connections
wal_keep_segments = 64                 # Keep extra WAL segments (PostgreSQL 9.4-12)
# For PostgreSQL 13+, use instead:
# wal_keep_size = 1GB
```

**Important Notes:**
- Replace `/mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal` with your actual `BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal` path
- The `test ! -f` prevents overwriting existing WAL files
- `%p` is the path of the file to archive
- `%f` is the file name only

### Step 4: Configure PostgreSQL Authentication (for pg_basebackup)

Edit `pg_hba.conf` to allow replication connections:

```bash
# Find pg_hba.conf location
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW hba_file;"

# Edit the file
sudo nano /etc/postgresql/14/main/pg_hba.conf
```

Add this line (adjust based on your setup):

```conf
# TYPE  DATABASE        USER            ADDRESS                 METHOD
# For local backups using unix socket
local   replication     alfresco                                md5
# Or for network backups
host    replication     alfresco        127.0.0.1/32            md5
host    replication     alfresco        ::1/128                 md5
```

### Step 5: Restart PostgreSQL

```bash
# Restart PostgreSQL to apply changes
sudo systemctl restart postgresql

# Verify PostgreSQL is running
sudo systemctl status postgresql
```

### Step 6: Verify WAL Configuration

```bash
# Check WAL settings
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW wal_level;"
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW archive_mode;"
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW archive_command;"

# Expected output:
# wal_level      | replica (or logical)
# archive_mode   | on
# archive_command| test ! -f /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f && cp %p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f
```

### Step 7: Test WAL Archiving

```bash
# Force a WAL segment switch and verify archiving works
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SELECT pg_switch_wal();"  # PostgreSQL 10+
# OR for PostgreSQL 9.6 and earlier:
# sudo -u postgres psql -c "SELECT pg_switch_xlog();"

# Check if WAL files are being archived
ls -lh /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/

# You should see WAL files like: 000000010000000000000001
```

### Step 8: Verify pg_basebackup Access

```bash
# Test that pg_basebackup can connect (will prompt for password)
pg_basebackup -h localhost -U alfresco -D /tmp/test_backup -Ft -z -P --wal-method=stream

# If successful, remove the test backup
rm -rf /tmp/test_backup
```

If you see errors, check:
- Database user has replication privileges: `ALTER USER alfresco REPLICATION;`
- `pg_hba.conf` allows replication connections
- Password is correct

### Troubleshooting WAL Configuration

**Script validation fails:**
The backup script will check these settings before running and provide specific error messages if something is wrong.

**WAL files not appearing in archive directory:**
```bash
# Check PostgreSQL logs for archive_command errors
sudo tail -f /var/log/postgresql/postgresql-14-main.log

# Common issues:
# - Wrong permissions on archive directory
# - Archive directory doesn't exist
# - Disk space full
```

**Replication permission denied:**
```bash
# Grant replication privilege to your backup user
sudo -u postgres psql -c "ALTER USER alfresco REPLICATION;"
```

## Backup Structure

```
BACKUP_DIR/
├── contentstore/
│   ├── daily-2025-01-15/
│   ├── daily-2025-01-16/
│   └── last -> daily-2025-01-16
├── postgres/
│   ├── base-2025-01-15/
│   └── base-2025-01-16/
├── pg_wal/
│   └── (WAL archive files)
└── backup-2025-01-16.log
```

## Email Alerts

Email alerts are sent **only on failures** and include:
- Which operation failed (PostgreSQL, Contentstore, WAL, Retention)
- Full error messages and stack traces
- Paths to failed backups
- Timestamps
- Log file location

No emails are sent for successful backups.

## Performance

The Python version has identical performance to the bash script because:
- Uses the same underlying tools (pg_basebackup, rsync)
- Python overhead is negligible (50ms startup vs hours of backup time)
- Same rsync hardlink strategy for space efficiency

## Troubleshooting

**Permission denied when installing packages in venv**:
If you created the venv with `sudo`, it's owned by root. Fix it:
```bash
# Remove the root-owned venv
cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
sudo rm -rf venv

# Ensure the directory is owned by your user
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Recreate venv as regular user (no sudo)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Lock file error**:
- Another backup is running, or a previous backup crashed
- Remove `BACKUP_DIR/backup.lock` if you're sure no backup is running

**WAL configuration validation failed**:
- Check that PostgreSQL is configured for archiving
- Ensure `postgresql.conf` exists in one of the expected locations
- Verify `wal_level`, `archive_mode`, and `archive_command` are properly set
- See error message for specific missing/incorrect settings

**pg_basebackup not found**:
- Install PostgreSQL client tools: `sudo apt-get install -y postgresql-client`

**Email not sending**:
- Check SMTP credentials in .env
- For Gmail, use an app-specific password
- Check firewall allows SMTP port (587)

## Security

- `.env` file is gitignored and contains sensitive credentials
- Never commit `.env` to version control
- Set appropriate file permissions: `chmod 600 .env`

Commit message:

Add PostgreSQL database and superuser configuration options. Update README and example environment file to reflect new variables. Enhance setup script to prompt for database and superuser details during configuration.

README.md, after:

# Alfresco Backup System

Python-based backup system for Alfresco Content Management System with PostgreSQL and contentstore backups.

## Features

- PostgreSQL WAL configuration validation (validates archiving is enabled)
- PostgreSQL base backup using pg_basebackup
- Contentstore rsync with hardlink optimization for space efficiency
- WAL archive monitoring
- Automated retention policy enforcement
- Email alerts on failures with detailed error information
- File-based locking to prevent concurrent executions
- Comprehensive logging

## Requirements

- Python 3.7+
- PostgreSQL client tools (pg_basebackup)
- rsync
- Sufficient disk space for backups

## Quick Installation (Recommended)

### Automated Setup Script

The easiest way to set up the backup system is using the interactive setup script:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup.git
cd alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Run the setup wizard WITH SUDO (recommended for easy directory creation)
sudo python3 setup.py
```

The setup script will:
- Check if all required tools are installed
- Help you create the `.env` configuration file
- Create all necessary backup directories (in `/mnt/backups` or similar)
- Configure proper permissions for WAL archiving
- **Automatically configure Alfresco's embedded PostgreSQL** for WAL archiving
  - Detects PostgreSQL version (9.4 for Alfresco 5.2)
  - Updates `postgresql.conf` with version-appropriate WAL settings
  - Uses `hot_standby` for PostgreSQL 9.4, `replica` for 9.6+
  - Updates `pg_hba.conf` for replication access
  - Creates backups of original config files
- Create a virtual environment and install dependencies
- Verify the installation

**Important:**
- **Recommended:** Run with `sudo` to avoid permission issues
- When run with sudo, all files will be owned by the actual user (not root)
- The script detects who ran sudo and ensures proper ownership
- The script asks permission before each step and explains what it will do
- PostgreSQL configuration files will be backed up before modification

After setup completes, you'll need to restart Alfresco for PostgreSQL changes to take effect.

---

## Manual Installation on Ubuntu

If you prefer to set up manually or need more control, follow these steps:

### Step 1: Update System Packages
```bash
sudo apt-get update
```

### Step 2: Install Python 3 and pip
```bash
sudo apt-get install -y python3 python3-pip python3-venv
```

### Step 3: Install PostgreSQL Client Tools
```bash
# Install PostgreSQL client tools (includes pg_basebackup)
sudo apt-get install -y postgresql-client

# Verify installation
pg_basebackup --version
```

### Step 4: Install rsync
```bash
sudo apt-get install -y rsync

# Verify installation
rsync --version
```

### Step 5: Clone or Download This Repository
```bash
# Clone as your Alfresco user (not root)
cd /opt
sudo mkdir -p alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
sudo chown $USER:$USER alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup.git
cd alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Ensure the directory is owned by the current user
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
```

### Step 6: Create Virtual Environment (Recommended)
```bash
# Create venv as regular user (NOT with sudo)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

### Step 7: Install Python Dependencies
```bash
# Install packages in the virtual environment (no sudo needed)
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Step 8: Create Backup Directory
```bash
# Create backup directory owned by current user
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups/alfresco
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /mnt/backups/alfresco
sudo chmod 755 /mnt/backups/alfresco
```

### Step 9: Configure Environment Variables

Create your `.env` file from the example:
```bash
# Copy and edit with your actual values
cat > .env << 'EOF'
# Database Configuration
PGHOST=localhost
PGPORT=5432
PGUSER=alfresco
PGPASSWORD=your_db_password_here
PGDATABASE=postgres
PGSUPERUSER=postgres

# Paths
BACKUP_DIR=/mnt/backups/alfresco
ALF_BASE_DIR=/opt/alfresco

# Retention Policy
RETENTION_DAYS=30

# Email Alerts (only sent on failures)
SMTP_HOST=smtp.gmail.com
SMTP_PORT=587
SMTP_USER=backups@yourcompany.com
SMTP_PASSWORD=your_email_password_here
ALERT_EMAIL=ops-team@yourcompany.com
ALERT_FROM=backups@yourcompany.com
EOF
```

**Configuration Variables Explained:**

- **PGHOST**: PostgreSQL host (usually `localhost` for embedded Alfresco PostgreSQL)
- **PGPORT**: PostgreSQL port (default: `5432`)
- **PGUSER**: PostgreSQL user for backups (this user will be created if it doesn't exist)
- **PGPASSWORD**: Password for the backup user
- **PGDATABASE**: Database to connect to (default: `postgres`, the system database)
- **PGSUPERUSER**: PostgreSQL superuser for granting privileges (usually `postgres` or `alfresco` depending on your installation)
  - Check with: `psql -U alfresco -d postgres -c "\du"` to see which user has "Superuser" attribute
- **BACKUP_DIR**: Directory where backups will be stored
- **ALF_BASE_DIR**: Alfresco installation directory
- **RETENTION_DAYS**: Number of days to keep old backups

**Important Notes:**
- The setup script will automatically create the `PGUSER` role if it doesn't exist
- `PGSUPERUSER` must be a PostgreSQL role with superuser privileges to grant replication rights
- In some Alfresco installations, `postgres` is the superuser; in others, it's `alfresco`
- You don't need a Linux user called `postgres` - this refers to PostgreSQL database roles

### Step 10: Set File Permissions
```bash
# Make the backup script executable
chmod +x backup.py

# Secure your .env file
chmod 600 .env
```

### Step 11: Verify Installation
```bash
# Test that all tools are available
python3 --version
pg_basebackup --version
rsync --version

# Test the backup script help
python3 backup.py --help 2>/dev/null || echo "Ready to configure and run backups"
```

## Usage

### Running Backups Manually

If using virtual environment:
```bash
cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
source venv/bin/activate
python backup.py
```

Or specify a custom env file location:
```bash
python backup.py /path/to/custom.env
```

### Scheduling with Cron

**Important:** Run cron jobs as the same user that runs Alfresco (not root). This ensures proper file permissions.

For daily backups at 2 AM, add to crontab:

**If using virtual environment:**
```bash
# Edit crontab as the Alfresco user (NOT using sudo crontab)
crontab -e

# Add this line (adjust paths if needed):
0 2 * * * cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup && /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup/venv/bin/python /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup/backup.py >> /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log 2>&1
```

**If installed system-wide:**
```bash
# Edit crontab as the Alfresco user (NOT using sudo crontab)
crontab -e

# Add this line:
0 2 * * * cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup && python3 backup.py >> /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log 2>&1
```

**Create the log file with proper permissions:**
```bash
sudo touch /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
sudo chown $USER:$USER /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
sudo chmod 644 /var/log/alfresco-backup-cron.log
```

## What Gets Backed Up

1. **PostgreSQL Database**: Full base backup using pg_basebackup in compressed tar format
2. **Contentstore**: All files in `ALF_BASE_DIR/contentstore` using rsync with hardlinks
3. **WAL Files**: Monitored in `BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal` for PITR capability

## PostgreSQL WAL Configuration Requirements

**Note:** If you used the automated setup script (`setup.py`), PostgreSQL is already configured. This section is for reference or manual configuration.

Alfresco 5.2 comes with embedded PostgreSQL. Before backups can run, it must be configured for WAL (Write-Ahead Log) archiving to enable Point-in-Time Recovery (PITR).

### Step 1: Locate PostgreSQL Configuration File

For Alfresco's embedded PostgreSQL, config files are typically in:
1. `ALF_BASE_DIR/postgresql/postgresql.conf`
2. `ALF_BASE_DIR/alf_data/postgresql/postgresql.conf`

The automated setup script will find and configure these automatically.

### Step 2: Create WAL Archive Directory

```bash
# Create WAL archive directory (must match BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal in your .env)
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal

# Make it writable by both postgres (for archiving) and your user (for monitoring)
sudo chown postgres:$USER /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal
sudo chmod 770 /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal
```

### Step 3: Edit PostgreSQL Configuration

**Required settings:**

```bash
# Edit postgresql.conf (use the path from Step 1)
sudo nano /etc/postgresql/14/main/postgresql.conf
```

Add or modify these settings:

```conf
# WAL archiving settings for PostgreSQL 9.4 (Alfresco 5.2)
wal_level = hot_standby                # Use 'hot_standby' for 9.4, 'replica' for 9.6+
archive_mode = on                      # Enable archiving
archive_command = 'test ! -f /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f && cp %p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f'
archive_timeout = 300                  # Force WAL switch every 5 minutes (optional)

# Recommended additional settings for backup
max_wal_senders = 3                    # Allow pg_basebackup connections
wal_keep_segments = 64                 # Keep extra WAL segments (PostgreSQL 9.4-12)
# For PostgreSQL 13+, use instead:
# wal_keep_size = 1GB
```

**Important Notes:**
- Replace `/mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal` with your actual `BACKUP_DIR/pg_wal` path
- The `test ! -f` prevents overwriting existing WAL files
- `%p` is the path of the file to archive
- `%f` is the file name only

### Step 4: Configure PostgreSQL Authentication (for pg_basebackup)

Edit `pg_hba.conf` to allow replication connections:

```bash
# Find pg_hba.conf location
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW hba_file;"

# Edit the file
sudo nano /etc/postgresql/14/main/pg_hba.conf
```

Add this line (adjust based on your setup):

```conf
# TYPE  DATABASE        USER            ADDRESS                 METHOD
# For local backups using unix socket
local   replication     alfresco                                md5
# Or for network backups
host    replication     alfresco        127.0.0.1/32            md5
host    replication     alfresco        ::1/128                 md5
```

### Step 5: Restart PostgreSQL

```bash
# Restart PostgreSQL to apply changes
sudo systemctl restart postgresql

# Verify PostgreSQL is running
sudo systemctl status postgresql
```

### Step 6: Verify WAL Configuration

```bash
# Check WAL settings
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW wal_level;"
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW archive_mode;"
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SHOW archive_command;"

# Expected output:
# wal_level      | replica (or logical)
# archive_mode   | on
# archive_command| test ! -f /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f && cp %p /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/%f
```

### Step 7: Test WAL Archiving

```bash
# Force a WAL segment switch and verify archiving works
sudo -u postgres psql -c "SELECT pg_switch_wal();"  # PostgreSQL 10+
# OR for PostgreSQL 9.6 and earlier:
# sudo -u postgres psql -c "SELECT pg_switch_xlog();"

# Check if WAL files are being archived
ls -lh /mnt/backups/alfresco/pg_wal/

# You should see WAL files like: 000000010000000000000001
```

### Step 8: Verify pg_basebackup Access

```bash
# Test that pg_basebackup can connect (will prompt for password)
pg_basebackup -h localhost -U alfresco -D /tmp/test_backup -Ft -z -P --wal-method=stream

# If successful, remove the test backup
rm -rf /tmp/test_backup
```

If you see errors, check:
- Database user has replication privileges: `ALTER USER alfresco REPLICATION;`
- `pg_hba.conf` allows replication connections
- Password is correct

### Troubleshooting WAL Configuration

**Script validation fails:**
The backup script will check these settings before running and provide specific error messages if something is wrong.

**WAL files not appearing in archive directory:**
```bash
# Check PostgreSQL logs for archive_command errors
sudo tail -f /var/log/postgresql/postgresql-14-main.log

# Common issues:
# - Wrong permissions on archive directory
# - Archive directory doesn't exist
# - Disk space full
```

**Replication permission denied:**
```bash
# Grant replication privilege to your backup user
sudo -u postgres psql -c "ALTER USER alfresco REPLICATION;"
```

## Backup Structure

```
BACKUP_DIR/
├── contentstore/
│   ├── daily-2025-01-15/
│   ├── daily-2025-01-16/
│   └── last -> daily-2025-01-16
├── postgres/
│   ├── base-2025-01-15/
│   └── base-2025-01-16/
├── pg_wal/
│   └── (WAL archive files)
└── backup-2025-01-16.log
```

## Email Alerts

Email alerts are sent **only on failures** and include:
- Which operation failed (PostgreSQL, Contentstore, WAL, Retention)
- Full error messages and stack traces
- Paths to failed backups
- Timestamps
- Log file location

No emails are sent for successful backups.

## Performance

The Python version has identical performance to the bash script because:
- Uses the same underlying tools (pg_basebackup, rsync)
- Python overhead is negligible (50ms startup vs hours of backup time)
- Same rsync hardlink strategy for space efficiency

## Troubleshooting

**Permission denied when installing packages in venv**:
If you created the venv with `sudo`, it's owned by root. Fix it:
```bash
# Remove the root-owned venv
cd /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup
sudo rm -rf venv

# Ensure the directory is owned by your user
sudo chown -R $USER:$USER /opt/alfresco-largecontentstore-backup

# Recreate venv as regular user (no sudo)
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Lock file error**:
- Another backup is running, or a previous backup crashed
- Remove `BACKUP_DIR/backup.lock` if you're sure no backup is running

**WAL configuration validation failed**:
- Check that PostgreSQL is configured for archiving
- Ensure `postgresql.conf` exists in one of the expected locations
- Verify `wal_level`, `archive_mode`, and `archive_command` are properly set
- See error message for specific missing/incorrect settings

**pg_basebackup not found**:
- Install PostgreSQL client tools: `sudo apt-get install -y postgresql-client`

**Email not sending**:
- Check SMTP credentials in .env
- For Gmail, use an app-specific password
- Check firewall allows SMTP port (587)

## Security

- `.env` file is gitignored and contains sensitive credentials
- Never commit `.env` to version control
- Set appropriate file permissions: `chmod 600 .env`
